---
id: 576
title: OpenSSL
date: 2005-01-30T07:51:08+00:00
author: Nicholas Dille
layout: post
permalink: /blog/2005/01/30/openssl/
categories:
  - Nerd of the Old Days
tags:
  - AES
  - Base64
  - MD5
  - OpenSSL
  - PGP
  - Salt
  - SHA1
  - SSL
---
The OpenSSL library provides access to SSL encrypted tunnels. Most of its functionality is accessible via the `openssl` command which is shipped with the OpenSSL package.<!--more-->

## Digests

A digest is a one-way transformation of a string (into a hash) that can be used to ensure the integrity of the string. For example, this technique is used in PGP to sign messages. Commonly used algorithms include MD5 and SHA-1.

The following command demonstrates how to generate a MD5 hash of the content of a file:

`openssl -md5 -in INFILE -out OUTFILE`

## Passwords

The `openssl` command can be used to generate hashed password as well as strings which are insusceptible by dictionary-based attacks against passwords.

* crypt3

  The crypt3 hash algorithm was formerly used to hash passwords on Unix systems but has been superseded by the md5-crypt hash algorithm, at least on linux systems.

  `openssl passwd -salt SALT PASSWORD`

* md5-crypt

  Similar to the above command, a hash password is generated from a password and a salt, though, the format of the output, the modular crypt format (MCF), is more sophisticated to allow for a variety of hash algorithms. The simple format which is discussed here begins with a `$` and consists of three fields separated by `$` where the first fields indicates which hash algorithm is used (md5-crypt was assigned 1), the second and third contain the salt and the password, respectively.

  `openssl passwd -1 -salt SALT PASSWORD`

  Please note, that there is a huge difference between a simple MD5 hash and a md5-crypt'ed password. Although the md5-crypt hash algorithm is based on the MD5 hash algorithm, the two can not be transformed into each other without knowledge of the plaintext password.

* Generation of N chars

  The `openssl` can also be used to create a string of pseudo-randomly chosen characters of a custom length:</p>

  `openssl rand -base64 N | head -c N`

## Base64 encoding

What is Base64

* Encoding

  `openssl enc -base64 -e -in INFILE -out OUTFILE`

* Decoding

  `openssl enc -base64 -d -in INFILE -out OUTFILE`

## Data encryption

Often the privacy of data that is transmitted over a private network is of major concern to the participating parties. The `openssl` also provides commonly used symmetrical encryption algorithms (asymmetrical encryption algorithms are covered by [gnupg](http://gnupg.org)) which are two-way transformations of strings based on a password.

The following commands demonstrate the use of the `openssl` command to encrypt the content of a file using the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) algorithm. The user is prompted for the password on the current terminal.

* Encrypt

  `openssl enc -aes256 -e -in INFILE -out OUTFILE`

* Decrypt

  `openssl enc -aes256 -d -in INFILE -out OUTFILE`

## SSL client

In addition, the `openssl` command can be used to open a SSL tunnel to a remote host which can be used to tunnel sensitive protocol data:

`openssl s_client -connect HOST:PORT`